README.md, before:

# Pyarraypool

![Licence](https://img.shields.io/github/license/arthurlm/pyarraypool)
![Python build](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/arthurlm/pyarraypool/Python?label=build%20python)
![Rust build](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/arthurlm/pyarraypool/Rust?label=build%20rust)
![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pyarraypool)
![PyPI - Implementation](https://img.shields.io/pypi/implementation/pyarraypool)
![PyPI - Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pyarraypool)

Transfer numpy array between processes using shared memory.

## Why creating this project ?

This library aims to speed up parallel data processing with CPython and [numpy](https://numpy.org/) NDArray.

> What is the issue with regular python multitasking ?

Python [GIL](https://wiki.python.org/moin/GlobalInterpreterLock) does not permit to use multithreading for parallel data processing.
It is indeed release when C code / [Cython (nogil)](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/parallelism.html#using-parallelism) / IO tasks are done but it is still lock for computation tasks.
This is why subprocess are often used to have multiple processing task done.

Alternative to subprocess worker exists but they are not always possible to use.
To list few of them:

- [numba](https://numba.pydata.org/) with `prange`
- switching from [CPython](https://github.com/python/cpython) to [PyPy](https://www.pypy.org/)
- rewrite code using C / Cython / Rust

> Why not using numpy builtin mmap ?

Numpy builtin [memory mapping](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.memmap.html) is made to manage a single numpy array.
It is not made to manage multiple "small" array that are frequently created / destroy.

## Few design choices

Python standard library already contains a module to create and manage [shared memory](https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.shared_memory.html).

However it does not permit to manage it as a RAW bloc safely and easily.
So performances drop because several system call must be done on each bloc creation / deletion.

In this library:

- shared memory is manage as a "pool" using Rust and low level CPython API.
- array can be attached and are release when refcount reach 0 in every processes.
- a spinlock is used to manage sync between process when bloc are add / removed (this can be improved).

## API usage

Here a simple example of how to use library.

```python
import pyarraypool
import multiprocessing
import numpy as np

def task(x, i, value):
    # Define a dummy task than read and write to shared numpy array
    x[i, :, :] = value

def main():
    arr = np.random.random((100, 200, 500))
    I, J, K = arr.shape

    with multiprocessing.Pool(processes=8) as pool:
        # Transfer the array to shared memory.
        #
        # Segment will be created automatically on first `make_transferable` call.
        shmarr = pyarraypool.make_transferable(arr)

        # Apply task to array
        pool.starmap(task, [
            (shmarr, i, i) for i in range(I)
        ])

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

You can have a look at `notebook` / `example` folders for more details.

## Developper guide

To build:

```sh
pip install maturin
maturin develop --extras test
```

To test:

```sh
# Run rust tests
cargo test
cargo clippy

# Run python tests
pytest -vv
flake8
autopep8 --diff -r python/
mypy .
```

To format code:

```sh
autopep8 -ir python/
isort .
```

## Project status

Project is currently a "POC" and not fully ready for production.

Few benchmark are still missing.
API can be improved and may change in near future.

See `TODO.md` for more details.

Any help / feedback is welcome 😊 !

Commit message:

Check process transfer before array release

README.md, after:

# Pyarraypool

![Licence](https://img.shields.io/github/license/arthurlm/pyarraypool)
![Python build](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/arthurlm/pyarraypool/Python?label=build%20python)
![Rust build](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/arthurlm/pyarraypool/Rust?label=build%20rust)
![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pyarraypool)
![PyPI - Implementation](https://img.shields.io/pypi/implementation/pyarraypool)
![PyPI - Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pyarraypool)

Transfer numpy array between processes using shared memory.

## Why creating this project ?

This library aims to speed up parallel data processing with CPython and [numpy](https://numpy.org/) NDArray.

> What is the issue with regular python multitasking ?

Python [GIL](https://wiki.python.org/moin/GlobalInterpreterLock) does not permit to use multithreading for parallel data processing.
It is indeed release when C code / [Cython (nogil)](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/parallelism.html#using-parallelism) / IO tasks are done but it is still lock for computation tasks.
This is why subprocess are often used to have multiple processing task done.

Alternative to subprocess worker exists but they are not always possible to use.
To list few of them:

- [numba](https://numba.pydata.org/) with `prange`
- switching from [CPython](https://github.com/python/cpython) to [PyPy](https://www.pypy.org/)
- rewrite code using C / Cython / Rust

> Why not using numpy builtin mmap ?

Numpy builtin [memory mapping](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.memmap.html) is made to manage a single numpy array.
It is not made to manage multiple "small" array that are frequently created / destroy.

## Few design choices

Python standard library already contains a module to create and manage [shared memory](https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.shared_memory.html).

However it does not permit to manage it as a RAW bloc safely and easily.
So performances drop because several system call must be done on each bloc creation / deletion.

In this library:

- shared memory is manage as a "pool" using Rust and low level CPython API.
- array can be attached and are release when refcount reach 0 in every processes.
- a spinlock is used to manage sync between process when bloc are add / removed (this can be improved).

## API usage

Here a simple example of how to use library.

```python
import pyarraypool
import multiprocessing
import numpy as np

def task(x, i, value):
    # Define a dummy task than read and write to shared numpy array
    x[i, :, :] = value

def main():
    arr = np.random.random((100, 200, 500))
    I, J, K = arr.shape

    with multiprocessing.Pool(processes=8) as pool:
        # Transfer the array to shared memory.
        #
        # Segment will be created automatically on first `make_transferable` call.
        shmarr = pyarraypool.make_transferable(arr)

        # Apply task to array
        pool.starmap(task, [
            (shmarr, i, i) for i in range(I)
        ])

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

You can have a look at `notebook` / `example` folders for more details.

## Fighting python GC

There is few things to know about array releasing.

When array are created in subprocess, GC can collect them before they are transfered in main process.

Exemple sequence:

1. Main process trigger subprocess job.
2. Subprocess has something to return and create a shared array in function return.
3. Subprocess GC is triggered and cleanup everything included return value.
   So refcount reach 0.
4. Main process wakes up and try to get subprocess return value.
   Value has already been collect by GC and release from pool => CRASH !

To fix this issue, there is a flag associated to each transferable array.
This flag is set when object has been transfered between 2 processes.
If this flag is not set, object will not be released.

In case you want to create a transferable object (but do not want to transfer it between processes), you
can override this flag using:

```python
shmarr = pyarraypool.make_transferable(arr, transfer_required=False)
```

Object will be releas from array pool as soon as refcount reach 0.

## Developper guide

To build:

```sh
pip install maturin
maturin develop --extras test
```

To test:

```sh
# Run rust tests
cargo test
cargo clippy

# Run python tests
pytest -vv
flake8
autopep8 --diff -r python/
mypy .
```

To format code:

```sh
autopep8 -ir python/
isort .
```

## Project status

Project is currently a "POC" and not fully ready for production.

Few benchmark are still missing.
API can be improved and may change in near future.

See `TODO.md` for more details.

Any help / feedback is welcome 😊 !
